Introducing the Book of Enoch, a
collection of ancient writings that were
banned from the Bible. It tells the lost
history of the Nephilim, said to be the
cursed offspring between humans and the
sons of God. Perhaps you've heard of
Enoch before, but what does it really
say? And why is it so often
misunderstood? In this video, I'll take
you inside the book of Enoch and explore
the history of the most famous book that
was banned from the Bible.
Across world mythology, one race of
monsters seems to appear again and
again. The giants, humanoid beings of
immense size and brutality. The north of
early Scandinavia spoke of beings called
the Udna, primordial entities known for
their cruelty and appetite for flesh.
The most famous of these is Emir, whose
dismembered body was used to shape the
forests, mountains, and fjords of the
earth. In the myths of ancient Greece,
we find the fearsome Giggantes, who
failed to overthrow the gods alongside
the Titans. One of these divine rebels
was called Prometheus, a titan who stole
fire from Zeus and gifted it to
humanity. His punishment to be chained
to a rock for eternity. Some of the
earliest descriptions of giants come
from the ancient Levant where early
Hebrew writers recorded myths of a
cursed offspring between angel and man.
They called them Nephilim. And it's
these giants that will come to play a
key role in the book of Enoch. The
origin of the Nephilim come from the
book of Genesis chapter 6. It tells the
early history of humankind and how they
were corrupted by a group of beings
known as the sons of God. And this is
the original text. When man began to
multiply on the face of the land, and
daughters were born to them, the sons of
God saw that the daughters of man were
attractive, and they took as their wives
any they chose. The Nephilim were on
earth in those days, and also afterward,
when the sons of God came into the
daughters of man, and they bore children
to them. These were the mighty men who
were of old, the men of renown. This
passage in Genesis reveals the true
origin of the Nephilim, a race of
semi-defined beings born of a forbidden
union between the human women and what
appears to be angels. In the story, God
is angered by humanity's corruption and
decides to drown the world in a great
flood. Aside from Noah and his family,
the rest of humanity are washed away.
Now, that should have been the end for
the Nephilim, but strangely they
reappear after the biblical flood. This
story comes from the book of Numbers
during the time when Moses led the
Hebrews through the desert as they
journeyed to the promised land. And
there we saw the Nephilim, the sons of
Anak, who come from the Nephilim. And we
seem to them like grasshoppers in their
sight. If we take that literally and
scale it up, the Nephilim would have
been around the size of the Statue of
Liberty. So, by this account, the
Nephilim truly are gigantic. Of course,
it's possible that this is an
exaggeration. Maybe a way to say they
were simply strong warriors rather than
evidence that they were actual giants.
Regardless, the Nephilim are some of the
most unusual and debated beings in all
of biblical law. But for such
interesting monsters, it's a shame that
almost nothing else is said about them.
But there are some hints if you know
where to look. It's times like these
when knowledge of biblical Hebrew comes
handy. Well, I've got you covered. When
you look at the word itself, Nephilim
comes from the root word nafal, meaning
fallen ones. Speaking of translation,
some of the best answers we have come
from an early Greek version of the
Bible. The Septuagent translates the
word Nephilim with the Greek word
gigantes, which as we've seen means
giants. All this is a good indication
about how the Nephilim were understood
back then. But I think we can one up
that. You see, around this time, other
stories began to circulate claiming to
reveal the true origin of the Nephilim,
and that was the book of Enoch. Of all
the characters to have their own band
biblical book, it's rather surprising
that the hero of our story is well,
Enoch. You see, in the canonical Bible,
Enoch is a very minor figure mentioned
only really in passing. Enoch appears
once listed in a very long family tree.
But unlike the other names on this list,
the Bible includes a very unusual
detail. Thus, all the days of Enoch were
years. Enoch walked with God and he was
not, for God took him. Aside from living
to the ripe old age of 365,
the text also reveals that Enoch walked
with God. What could that mean? Ever
since the earliest biblical
interpretations, this line has caught
people's attention, especially as the
Nephilim story is directly afterwards.
It was not long until people began
putting the pieces together and wrote
stories to expand on the mysteries left
unanswered by the book of Genesis. The
result is the book of Enoch, the story
of what happened when Enoch walked with
God. It claims to contain extra details
about the events in the book of Genesis
and the origin of the biblical Nephilim.
What's more, it contained details so
startling that it was banned from the
biblical cannon. In fact, it's a miracle
that this text has even survived. You
see, it was only relatively recently
that the book of Enoch was reintroduced
to the West. In6007,
English explorer Sir Walter Raleigh was
imprisoned in the Tower of London,
awaiting trial for a plot against the
king. To pass the time in jail, Raleigh
embarked on writing an entire history of
the world. Although this book was
ultimately unfinished, Raleigh mentions
a strange rumor he had heard that there
was a lost text written by the biblical
Enoch which revealed quote the course of
the stars, their names and motions.
According to Raleigh, it was being kept
safely in the land of Sheba, which today
we know as Ethiopia. At the time,
Raleigh's cryptic reference to the book
of Enoch went largely unnoticed. But
that was until 1773 when a collection of
ancient manuscripts were smuggled out of
Ethiopia. Among them was a copy of what
we now know as the Book of Enoch. You
see, Ethiopia is home to some of the
oldest Christian churches in the world.
Yet, it's often left out of many
Christian histories. In fact, some of
the Bible's greatest treasures are said
to be housed there. If the stories are
to be believed, it may be the final
resting place of the Ark of the
Covenant. But that's a story of another
video. Anyway, ever since its origins,
the Ethiopian Orthodox Church has
regarded the Book of Enoch as canonical
and still does to this day. As scholars
examined and translated these ancient
manuscripts, some dating as far back as
the fifth century AD, they soon realized
that in their hands was the lost book of
Enoch as described by Sir Walter Rally.
Fast forward to the midentth century
with the discovery of the Dead Sea
Scrolls, a cache of ancient manuscripts
discovered in caves above the ruins of
an ancient monastery preserved by the
desert's heat and dryness. Some of these
texts included copies of the Book of
Enoch. In fact, they were some of the
oldest non-biblical texts ever
discovered and confirmed the theory that
the Book of Enoch was indeed ancient.
And here's what they found inside.
The Book of Enoch, sometimes referred to
as one Enoch, is a collection of at
least five separate writings stitched
together into one larger work. These
include the book of watchers, the
parables of Enoch, the book of the
luminaries, the book of visions, and
finally the letter of Enoch. Each of
these five books were written at
different times from around the 3rd
century BC all the way to the 1st
century AD. Each section focuses on a
different subject. From the book of
visions, which contains strange
apocalyptic dreams, to the book of the
luminaries, which charts the movements
of the sun, moon, and stars. But let's
begin with the most dramatic of them
all, which documents the fall of the
angels and the rise of the Nephilim. The
book of Enoch opens with a warning to
all who would dare to read it. a warning
of an apocalypse. You see, in the
distant future, God will emerge from
heaven and his angelic armies will
descend upon the earth. Those who have
embraced a life of sin will be cast into
the fire. This is a pretty ominous
opening, but Enoch tells us that such
threats should not be taken lightly.
After all, it would not be the first
time that God has chosen to end all
creation. The book of watchers is set
near the start of the book of Genesis
when the children of Adam and Eve began
to spread across the face of the earth.
Now, life was tough for these early
people. You see, within a few days of
even existing, Adam and Eve had already
forfeited the Garden of Eden and their
son Cain had murdered his brother Abel.
It was not a great start, but things
were about to get worse. A lot worse. Up
in heaven lived a group of angels known
as the watchers. Although their duty was
to guide humanity, they soon became well
distracted. You see, as they watched
over humanity, their gaze began to turn
toward the human women. Drawn in by
their beauty, a dark desire began to
develop. And the watchers, the sons of
heaven, saw them and desired them. And
they said to one another, "Come, let us
choose for ourselves wives from the
daughters of men, and let us begget
children for ourselves." Among the
watchers was a chieftain named
Shemehaza, a powerful angel who led his
fallen comrades down to earth, and from
there committed a great sin against God.
The human women soon fell pregnant and
gave birth to a cursed offspring, the
Nephilim, a race of savage, cruel giants
who stood at the size of mountains. It
was not long until they began to run
rampant across the earth. And the giants
began to kill men and to devour them.
and they began to sin against the birds
and beasts and creeping things and the
fish and to devour one another's flesh.
With the rise of the Nephilim on earth,
the Watchers had brought untold
corruption against the natural order,
and soon the earth itself cried out
under their lawlessness. But the sin of
the Watchers was not over. In fact, it
was only just getting started. During
the chaos and calamity wrought by
Shemahhaza and his followers, another
watcher known as Azarel began to take
pity on the humans. Seeing their
primitive ways, he revealed to them the
many secrets of heaven. Azahel taught
the humans the art of metallurgy. How to
mine metals hidden in the earth and
craft them into weapons of war. He also
taught them how to shape gold into
jewelry and crowns. Azarel taught
humanity the art of civilization and
with it unlocked an insatiable appetite
for knowledge. It was not long for the
other watchers to take notice and they
too began to reveal their secrets.
Shehaza taught enchantments and root
cutings. Barakeel taught astrology.
Kakabiel, the constellations. Zikiel,
the knowledge of the clouds. Arachiel,
the signs of the earth. Shamsiel, the
signs of the sun. And Zariel, the signs
of the moon. Now, my favorite watcher is
the lesserk known one called Hermani,
who, and I'm not making this up, taught
the humans the art of witchcraft and
wizardry.
>> It's Levy Osar. Armed with this
forbidden knowledge, the humans began to
construct, create, and destroy. Warfare
and violence spread across the land, and
once again, the earth cried out in pain,
and this time, heaven heard its call. Up
in heaven, the remaining angels loyal to
God looked down in despair. This
included the four archangels, Michael,
Raphael, Gabriel, and Siel. Outraged by
the chaos the Watchers had unleashed
upon the world, they called out to God,
asking why he did not do anything to
stop them. You know all things before
they happen, and you see these things,
and you permit them. Seated upon his
shining golden throne, God reveals that
a plan has already been made. The only
solution to deal with the Watchers is to
wipe the world clean with a great flood.
But there was one more thing left to be
done. You see, there is one man on earth
who is to be the final peace in
fulfilling God's plan.
Deep in the wilderness, far from the
emerging civilizations of man was a
mystic and scribe named Enoch. He led a
simple life of contemplation and prayer
and dwelt in the presence of God. But as
we shall see, he would get far more than
he'd bargained for. It all happened in a
flash. Enoch found himself taken up from
the earth and into heaven. Before him
was a terrifying sight, a throne bathed
in flaming fire, shining like the golden
majesty of the sun itself. Surrounding
the throne were angels and other
indescribable beings. Then a voice,
"Come here, Enoch, and hear my words."
It was God, and he had a message for
Enoch. Enoch, righteous scribe, go and
say to the watchers of heaven, "A great
sentence has gone forth against you. You
will have no relief or petition because
of the unrighteous deeds that you have
revealed." Enoch is tasked with
delivering a message to the watchers. As
they have sinned against creation, they
are about to be punished by the angels.
And it is Enoch who is to announce their
judgment. Suddenly, Enoch found himself
back on Earth under the cool night sky.
There he meditates, illuminated by the
light of young stars.
The next section of the book of watchers
follows Enoch's quest to find the fallen
angels. The prophet journeys to all four
corners of the earth, guided by the
angels loyal to God. One of his
companions, the angel Uriel, shows Enoch
the workings of the cosmos, how the sun
rises and sets, where the winds come
from, and how the stars form the
constellations. Uriel then leads Enoch
to a vast and empty chasm. Below them,
flames burn in the depths. It is a
terrible sight, and a fear begins to
grip Enoch. And Uriel notices. Enoch,
why are you so frightened and shaken?
Because of this terrible place and
because of the fearful sight. And he
said, this place is a prison for the
angels. Here they will be confined
forever. Uriel reveals to Enoch that
they are stood at the very entrance of
hell itself. Although it is under
construction, this prison will become
the home of the fallen angels and all
who follow in their ways. Enoch
continues his journey and is soon met by
the angel Gabriel. He takes him to a
walled garden filled with the pleasant
smell of cinnamon and sweet perfume. At
the center of the garden stands a tree
far greater than any other. This is the
tree of wisdom from which your father
and mother of old ate and learned
wisdom. Their eyes were opened and they
knew they were naked and they were
driven from the garden. Gabriel reveals
to Enoch that they are standing beside
the Garden of Eden, the earthly paradise
and place of humanity's first sin. After
many years of exploring the earth, Enoch
finally nears the end of his quest, for
he has found the Watchers. It was a
terrible sight, though not for the
reasons you would expect. You see, the
watchers were all curled up, afraid and
trembling, unable to lift up their eyes
out of shame. As Enoch read aloud their
sentence, the watchers pleaded God for
mercy and forgiveness, begging Enoch to
persuade God to withhold his judgment.
In the spirit of fairness or naivity,
Enoch agrees to their request. He will
make their case before God and see
whether he will change his mind. And
with that he departs. That night Enoch
had a strange dream. In it he was once
again in heaven standing before the
throne of God engulfed in fire. Be not
afraid Enoch, righteous man and scribe
of truth. Come here and hear my voice.
God tells Enoch that the watchers will
receive no forgiveness. Their actions
have brought devastation upon the earth.
And because of them, God will send a
great flood to rid humanity of their
corruption, as well as eradicate the
scourge of the Nephilim. But even after
the flood, traces of corruption will
remain in the hearts of man. Remnants of
the forbidden knowledge left behind by
the watchers. And like a rot, it will
once again spread. And so God tells
Enoch that in the distant future there
will be another judgment, an apocalypse
where God himself will intervene. And
that is the book of watchers. As an
opening to the book of Enoch, you
couldn't ask for anything better. From
fallen angels to ferocious giants, it
has everything, especially when it comes
to the Nephilim. You see, where the
canonical Bible mentions them only
briefly, Enoch expands on their story,
revealing how they were indeed giants
and children of fallen angels known as
the Watchers. But there's more to it
than just that. You see, the Book of
Enoch also reveals that civilization
itself is a gift from the fallen angels
who revealed to humanity the secrets of
heaven. Now, something that you might
also have noticed is that throughout the
book of Enoch so far, there is talk
about an apocalypse, a final day of
judgment in the future when the world
will come to an end. These apocalyptic
warnings dominate the book of Enoch with
ideas that were largely absent from the
other Old Testament texts. And that's no
coincidence. You see, something very
significant was happening around the
time that Enoch was written. And it's
here we turn to next.
In 167 BC, the holy city of Jerusalem
was at the center of a religious crisis.
The Greek king Antiochus IVth Epiphies
had desecrated the Jewish temple in the
worst possible way. He had installed a
pagan idol of Zeus inside the temple of
Israel, the sacred house of God. The
desecration of the Jewish temple in 167
marked a turning point in centuries of
Greek rule over the Jewish people dating
back to the conquests of Alexander. The
Jews experienced a period of relative
tolerance. But soon they faced open
aggression, especially under Antarus IV.
And according to the Jewish historian
Flavius Josephus, it was terrible. He
compelled the Jews to dissolve the laws
of their country to keep their infants
uncircumcised and to sacrifice pig's
flesh upon the altar against which they
all opposed and the leaders among them
were put to death. In these desperate
times, many turned to their scriptures.
However, these ancient biblical writings
seemed to offer little comfort in this
strange new world. Despite their
obedience to the Jewish law, God's
chosen still suffered while their
foreign overlords continued to prosper.
This crisis of faith in the 2n century
BC reshaped the entire worldview of many
Jews at the time. Evil was no longer
seen as a human wrongdoing, but instead
as an external cosmic force, an evil
invader from the spiritual world. Soon,
people began to imagine their world as
being inhabited by evil spirits. And
judging by the current political
situation, it seemed that evil was
winning. It was around this time when
new stories began to emerge. Texts that
described visions where God himself
would one day intervene and put an end
to the corruption in a fiery cataclysm
at the end of time to describe this new
genre of biblical writings. People began
to use the word apocalypsis, a word
borrowed from their Greek masters
meaning to uncover. In fact, it's the
root of the English word apocalypse. One
of the most influential of these
apocalyptic writings was the biblical
book of Daniel, the story of how a
prophet in Babylon survived under
foreign kings and famously escaped the
lion's den. But it is later in this very
same book when Daniel receives a number
of strange visions featuring animals
that represent the earthly kingdoms and
also how a son of man will come to set
the world right. At the time, the book
of Daniel was so beloved that it was
eventually included in the biblical
cannon despite being one of the latest
Old Testament texts. In fact, we know
this because sections of this book were
written in Aramaic, a later language
that had begun to replace Hebrew in
everyday speech during this time. But
there were many other apocalyptic texts
that did not make it into the Bible. And
the most famous of these was the Book of
Enoch. As we have seen, the Book of
Enoch is deeply rooted in apocalyptic
thought. It paints a world that was
corrupted by supernatural beings and
foretells a divine judgment where God
will wipe away evil once and for all.
Despite the book of Enoch never making
it into the biblical cannon, it was
enormously influential among certain
Jewish groups of the time. This is
evidenced by some of the oldest
fragments of Enoch among the Dead Sea
Scrolls that were likely used by an
apocalyptic Jewish sect who withdrew to
the desert to separate themselves from
the evils of civilization. And while
those Greek kingdoms eventually
collapsed after a Jewish revolt, these
apocalyptic beliefs would later
resurface during the Roman annexation of
Judea in 63 BC. You see, around the turn
of the millennium, a certain carpenter
from Nazareth began to speak of another
judgment and a great renewal under the
kingdom of God. But that's another story
entirely. As for the book of Enoch, its
talk of apocalypses likely stem from its
historical context. And knowing the
world in which Enoch came from is
essential to unlock this text. Among
many biblical scholars, Enoch is
considered to be one of the finest
examples of Jewish apocalypticism that
we have, even though it was ultimately
excluded from the Bible. And with that,
let's resume where we left off and
explore the next chapter of the book of
Enoch.
The book of parables is the second
section of the book of Enoch. Now, many
scholars believe that it was originally
written much later, likely by a
different author. It contains strange
visions of the future in which God will
raise up the righteous and punish the
wicked. Listen, Ocs, the words of the
Holy One, which I speak in the presence
of the Lord of Spirits. During his
travels, Enoch received many visions of
the future that one day there will be a
final judgment. Although the precise
time and place cannot be known, it will
come when humanity is governed by
corrupt rulers and powerful kings. The
vision is centered around a chosen one
who will come to save humanity. This
figure is given the title son of man and
he will carry the wisdom and authority
of heaven. According to this prophecy,
he will rise on earth to confront the
proud and expose the many injustices of
the wicked. The faces of the mighty
shall be cast down, and shame shall
cover them. Afterwards, the angels shall
measure paradise and prepare it for the
faithful, those who lived according to
God's commandments. In this new age,
they will be taken away to live in
paradise forever. The book of parables
then ends with something rather cryptic.
You see, the angels have a message for
Enoch about the role that he is due to
play. You are that son of man who was
born for righteousness and righteousness
dwells upon you. In other words, it
seems that Enoch is meant to be God's
chosen one, the very son of man who
appeared in his vision. But before we
can learn anything more, the text comes
to an abrupt close. The book of parables
is your standard apocalyptic fair. The
wicked are sent to hell and the
righteous ascend to heaven, all tied up
in a neat ribbon of fire and brimstone.
The text focuses heavily on a mysterious
figure called the son of man who remains
the central mystery of this book.
Although this term appears in the book
of Daniel, it seems that the book of
Enoch is the first to present the son of
man as some sort of divine figure. And
Enoch won't be the last to do this. Just
read the Gospel of Mark 13 which uses
strikingly similar language. Let's
continue our journey through the book of
Enoch, which takes a turn to the stars.
As we know from the canonical book of
Genesis, Enoch lived a long life, 365
years to be exact. Now, to pass the
time, he probably needed a hobby, and it
looks like he might have found one. The
book of the luminaries is all about
astronomy, the movements of celestial
bodies like the sun, moon, and stars.
The text reads like an ancient
stargazing manual that was revealed to
Enoch by the angel Uriel. It contains
precise descriptions of the stars and
other heavenly bodies. With this data,
Enoch lays out how these cycles can be
organized into charts to keep the time
or to you and me, a calendar. The key
part of this book is its description of
a solar calendar, one that follows the
movements of the sun. In fact, Enoch's
calendar is rather similar to the one we
use today. It describes a year as a
period of 364
days divided into four distinct seasons
of 91 days each. In many ways, it's
surprisingly familiar. Although, there's
one problem. A true solar year is 365
days and a quarter. If this difference
isn't properly accounted for, the
seasons would gradually shift. To
correct this, the Book of Enoch adds an
extra day periodically, similar to the
leap year in our modern calendar. The
Book of the Luminaries is a bit of an
odd one out when it comes to the Book of
Enoch. After all, what does astronomy
have to do with any of this? Consider
Enoch's age, 365 years. It just so
happens to be the length of a solar
year. And that detail must have
intrigued people even back then. And
yes, according to the Bible, people had
massive lifespans, including Enoch.
Although that's nothing when compared to
his son, Methuselah, who reached the age
of 969
years old. Just shy of a millennium.
Methuselah is the oldest character in
the Bible. Well, except for God, of
course. In fact, to honor his age, one
of the oldest stars in the universe,
HD14283,
has been dubbed the Methusela star. It's
estimated to be around 12 billion years
old and acts as a window into the dawn
of the universe itself. It's another
curious link to Enoch and astronomy. One
thing that the book of the luminaries
reveals to us is that back then science
and religion were one and the same. In
the book of Enoch, movements of the
celestial bodies were used to predict
the fates and fortunes for the people on
Earth. We actually see this throughout
world mythology. One famous example is
the orbit of the planet Venus, one of
the brightest objects in the night sky.
Often visible just before dawn, the
morning star appears to travel downwards
towards the earth just like an angel
falling from the sky. In fact, the
Romans called this star Lightbringer or
Lucifer.
Diabolical coincidences aside, let's
explore the fourth section of the book
of Enoch and quite possibly the
strangest one of them all. As we've
seen, the book of Enoch is rooted in its
historical context, a time when Judea
was under the rule of the Henistic
Kings. But this was nothing new.
Throughout the Old Testament, Israel
passes from the hands of many foreign
rulers from the Egyptians, Babylonians,
Persians, and eventually to the Greeks.
And it's here where the book of visions
comes in. It effectively retells the
history of Israel from the days of Enoch
and the flood all the way up to the
period of its composition. For some,
history can be a little dry. But the
book of Enoch has an answer for that. In
its version of history, every nation is
represented by a different animal. This
has led to a rather brilliant name among
scholars, the animal apocalypse. It all
starts with two cows living happily in a
field. These cows represent humanity in
its purest state. However, as the herd
grows, their peaceful life is suddenly
disturbed when the stars themselves fall
down to earth and begin to breed with
the cows. Those stars represent the
watchers, those fallen angels from
before. Meanwhile, God looks down at a
zoo tycoon experiment gone wrong and
decides to reset it with a great flood.
Anyway, the rest of the dream vision
follows the history of Israel,
represented by a flock of sheep. The
flock survives attacks from bears,
lions, hyenas, ravens, and eagles. Each
representing different nations that
ruled over the land at various points in
history. One day, the traumatized sheep
are suddenly rescued by God, and all
their enemies are cast into the fire.
Then among them, a mighty leader is
raised up, a glorious white bull who
rules over the flock. As the vision
draws to a close, the whole world are
suddenly transformed back into cows.
If you've ever read Animal Farm by
George Orwell, you'll know that it uses
pigs to describe the rise of communism.
Well, Enoch's Book of Visions works in a
similar way. It retells the biblical
apocalypse with sheep. These strange
symbols and analogies were actually
quite common in these ancient
apocalyptic texts. Similar visions can
be found in the book of Daniel, which
describes four beasts rising from the
sea, each representing a different
nation. Animal symbols like these worked
as a kind of code for readers. Those who
knew what the animals represented could
grasp the hidden meaning and unlock the
political message underneath. These
animal descriptions continued well into
the Christian period. If you're familiar
with the book of Revelation or have
watched my video, you'll know that it
too is filled with bizarre creatures
believed to represent the Roman Empire.
Speaking of end times, we now approach
the final section of the book of Enoch.
The Book of Enoch closes with a letter
from Enoch to his followers. Throughout
his long life, God has revealed to him
untold mysteries and horrors of the
universe. And Enoch wants to pass on his
final thoughts to those who have made it
this far. But many of them are warnings.
Woe to you, O rich, for in your riches
you have trusted. From your riches you
will depart because you have not
remembered the most high in the days of
your riches. In the style of an ancient
prophet, Enoch condemns the sins of the
world, greed, corruption, and the
oppression of the poor. But amid the
warnings, there is a message for the
faithful. Though the people might suffer
now, Enoch promises a great reversal.
Those who built their riches on cruelty
will be brought low, and the humble will
be raised up. Exactly when and what
time, no one knows. And with that, the
book of Enoch comes to an end. Over the
course of more than a 100 chapters, we
now know exactly what happened when
Enoch walked with God. From such a small
line in the Old Testament, the writers
of Enoch have crafted a sprawling epic
from apocalyptic parables and visions of
cosmic judgment. For lovers of
mythology, it has everything you could
ask for, especially when it comes to the
mysterious Nephilim and their origin.
But where I find this book especially
interesting is its links to the real
life politics of ancient Judea and how
the oppression of foreign rulers gave
rise to apocalyptic thinking with its
tales of evil kings and mighty rulers
being humbled before the throne of God.
But there's one final question about the
book of Enoch. If this text was so
influential and widely read, then what
happened to it? Why did the Book of
Enoch not make it into the Bible?
As we've seen, the Book of Enoch and the
broader rise of apocalyptic texts
represent a style of Jewish thought in
the centuries before the time of Jesus.
While writings like the book of Daniel
eventually made it into the Bible, the
Book of Enoch did not. There are many
reasons for this, and one of them is
fairly straightforward. You see, the
Book of Enoch's contents are simply
extreme. The idea of fallen angels
simply wouldn't have complemented the
established body of Jewish literature at
the time. The texts that would
eventually develop into the Bible's Old
Testament were more concerned with
matters surrounding the Jewish law. And
then there's the question of authorship.
Although this book was supposedly
written by the biblical Enoch, the fact
that it was a relative latecomer led
many to question its authenticity. While
the book of Enoch may not have been
mainstream, it's important to remember
that ancient Judaism was very diverse.
In the centuries before Jesus, different
religious groups held very different
views. And so these apocalyptic writings
like Enoch circulated at the fringes of
society. Now, how the book of Enoch was
received in ancient Judaism is one
thing. What about the Book of Enoch and
Christianity?
Here's where things get interesting. You
see, some of the earliest Christian
texts have echoes to Enoch. In the New
Testament Epistle of Jude, the book of
Enoch is even quoted. This suggests that
the author not only knew of Enoch, but
understood it as authoritative. Many of
Enoch's ideas seemed to be wellplaced
within these early Christian
communities. As far as we can tell, the
early Christians believed that Jesus
would return in their lifetime and with
him a day of judgment would come. As
Christianity began to expand, it moved
away from its original setting in Judea
and with it began to evolve into
something different. Guided by figures
like Athanasius and Augustine, the
followers of Jesus began to focus less
on things like the apocalypse and more
on questions like the status and nature
of Jesus. And with it, it seems that the
book of Enoch was gradually left out of
the Christian cannon. But there were
those who held on to the book of Enoch,
those outside the sphere of Western
Christianity far to the south in the
African nation of Ethiopia. The book of
Enoch was and still is regarded as
canonical and we have these churches to
thank for preserving this remarkable
piece of apocryphal biblical writing.
The Book of Enoch has left an imprint on
Christian culture as we know it. Many
say that the Book of Enoch popularized
the myth of the fallen angel, an idea
that first appears in this ancient text.
This strange, wonderful, and curious
book belongs to an extended universe of
banned biblical literature. But of
course, Enoch is one of many and is far
from the most controversial. That title
goes to the Gnostic Gospels, a series of
Christian texts that claim to reveal the
forbidden teachings of Jesus, including
the Gospel of Judas. Watch here to find
out more.
Hey, thanks for watching. I really hope
you enjoyed this one. If you like this
video and want to see more, why not
subscribe? A like and a comment also go
a really long way. So many of you
enjoyed my last video, and thank you for
your amazing comments. I really enjoy
making these deeper dives, so let me
know if you like this kind of long- form
content. Oh, and a big thank you to my
patrons. So many of you have joined to
watch bonus content, Q&As's, and
behindthe-scenes news. So, thank you.
Anyway, I look forward to seeing you
next time. Goodbye.